Heart disease refers to any problem affecting the heart, such as coronary artery disease, arrhythmia, and heart failure. 
According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), heart disease is the leading cause of death in the United States. Around 1 in 4 deaths in the U.S. occur due to heart disease, and the condition affects all genders as well as all racial and ethnic groups.
In this article, learn more about the types, causes, and symptoms of heart disease. This article also covers risk factors and treatment.
Heart disease refers to any condition affecting the cardiovascular system. There are several different types of heart disease, and they affect the heart and blood vessels in different ways.
The sections below look at some different types of heart disease in more detail.
Coronary artery disease, also known as coronary heart disease, is the most common type of heart disease.
It develops when the arteries that supply blood to the heart become clogged with plaque. This causes them to harden and narrow. Plaque contains cholesterol and other substances.
As a result, the blood supply reduces, and the heart receives less oxygen and fewer nutrients. In time, the heart muscle weakens, and there is a risk of heart failure and arrhythmias.
When plaque builds up in the arteries, it is called atherosclerosis. Plaque in the arteries can rupture from blockages and cause blood flow to stop, which can lead to a heart attack. 
A person with a congenital heart defect is born with a heart problem. There are many types of congenital heart defects, including: 
Congenital heart disease can involve major structural issues, such as the absence of a ventricle or problems with unusual connections between the main arteries that leave the heart.
Many congenital heart defects do not cause any noticeable symptoms and only become apparent during a routine medical check. 
According to the American Heart Association (AHA), heart murmurs often affect children, but only some are due to a defect.
Arrhythmia refers to an irregular heartbeat. It occurs when the electrical impulses that coordinate the heartbeat do not work correctly. As a result, the heart may beat too quickly, too slowly, or erratically.
There are various types of arrhythmias, including:
A person may notice a feeling like a fluttering or a racing heart. 
In some cases, arrhythmias can be life threatening or have severe complications.
In dilated cardiomyopathy, the heart chambers become dilated, meaning that the heart muscle stretches and becomes thinner. The most common causes of dilated cardiomyopathy are past heart attacks, arrhythmias, and toxins, but genetics can also play a role.
As a result, the heart becomes weaker and cannot pump blood properly. It can result in arrhythmia, blood clots in the heart, and heart failure.
It usually affects people aged 20–60 years, according to the AHA.
Also known as heart attack, myocardial infarction involves an interruption of the blood flow to the heart. This can damage or destroy part of the heart muscle. 
The most common cause of heart attack is plaque, a blood clot, or both in a coronary artery. It can also occur if an artery suddenly narrows or spasms.
Are there different types of heart attack? Learn more here.
When a person has heart failure, their heart is still working but not as well as it should be. Congestive heart failure is a type of heart failure that can occur from problems with the pumping or relaxing function.
Heart failure can result from untreated coronary artery disease, high blood pressure, arrhythmias, and other conditions. These conditions can affect the heart’s ability to pump or relax properly.
Heart failure can be life threatening, but seeking early treatment for heart-related conditions can help prevent complications.
This condition usually develops when a genetic problem affects the heart muscle. It tends to be an inherited condition.
The walls of the muscle thicken, and contractions become harder. This affects the heart’s ability to take in and pump out blood. In some cases, an obstruction can occur.
There may be no symptoms, and many people do not receive a diagnosis. However, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy can worsen over time and lead to various heart problems. 
Anyone with a family history of this condition should ask for screening, as receiving treatment can help prevent complications. 
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is the main cause of cardiac death among young people and athletes under 35 years old, according to the AHA.
This event occurs when the mitral valve in the heart does not close tightly enough and allows blood to flow back into the heart. 
As a result, blood cannot move through the heart or body efficiently, and it can put pressure on the chambers of the heart. In time, the heart can become enlarged, and heart failure can result.
Learn more about heart valves here.
This happens when the valve flaps of the mitral valve do not close properly. Instead, they bulge into the left atrium. This can cause a heart murmur. 
Mitral valve prolapse is not usually life threatening, but some people may need to receive treatment for it.
Genetic factors and connective tissue problems can cause this condition, which affects around 2% of the population. 
In aortic stenosis, the pulmonary valve is thick or fused and does not open correctly. This makes it hard for the heart to pump blood from the left ventricle into the aorta. 
A person may be born with it due to congenital anomalies of the valve, or it may develop over time due to calcium deposits or scarring.
The symptoms of heart disease depend on the specific type a person has. Also, some heart conditions cause no symptoms at all.
That said, the following symptoms may indicate a heart problem:
In children, the symptoms of a congenital heart defect may include cyanosis, or a blue tinge to the skin, and an inability to exercise.
Some signs and symptoms that could indicate heart attack include: 
Heart attack can lead to cardiac arrest, which is when the heart stops and the body can no longer function. A person needs immediate medical attention if they have any symptoms of a heart attack.
If cardiac arrest occurs, the person will need:
Heart disease develops when there is: 
In some cases, there is a genetic cause. However, some lifestyle factors and medical conditions can also increase the risk. These include:
The World Health Organization (WHO) mentions poverty and stress as two key factors contributing to a global increase in heart and cardiovascular disease.
Which foods can help manage cholesterol? Learn more here.
The treatment options will vary depending on the type of heart disease a person has, but some common strategies include making lifestyle changes, taking medications, and undergoing surgery.
The following sections look at some of these options in more detail.
Various medications can help treat heart conditions. The main options include:
A doctor will work with the individual to find a suitable option. 
Sometimes, side effects occur. If this is the case, it may be necessary to review the medication regimen.
Undergoing heart surgery can help treat blockages and heart problems when medications are not effective. 
Some common types of surgery include:
Learn how long it takes to recover from bypass surgery here.
Some lifestyle measures can help reduce the risk of heart disease. These include:
Taking these steps can help boost overall health and reduce the risk of heart disease and its complications.
Heart disease is a common health problem. 
There are several different types of heart disease. Some stem from genetic problems and are not preventable. 
In many cases, however, a person can take steps to prevent heart disease and its complications. These steps include following a healthy diet, getting plenty of exercise, and seeking advice when the first symptoms of heart disease appear.
Read this article in Spanish.
 Last medically reviewed on  July 21, 2021
Share this article
How does a heart attack differ to heart failure? Read on to learn more about these two types of heart disease, such as how they differ, their causes…
Carotid artery disease develops when the arteries that carry blood to the brain get narrower or clogged due to plaque buildup. Learn more about the…
A new study indicates that people who have used a vape at any point in their lives are 19% more likely to experience heart failure compared to people…
Researchers say healthy sleep patterns can help reduce the risk of cardiovascular disease, coronary heart disease, and stroke
Researchers are recommending utilizing big data and machine learning to improve the widely used Framingham Risk Score to better diagnose women with…
OUR BRANDS